JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
WOMAN: Mr. McCain, aye.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A dramatic
return for John McCain, as
Republicans muster just enough
votes in the Senate to move
ahead on health care, but the
future of replacing Obamacare
is far from clear.
Then:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: I am disappointed
in the attorney general.
He shouldn't have
recused himself.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
takes aim at Jeff Sessions,
publicly airing frustrations
with his own attorney
general, as talks of
a replacement ramp up.
Plus: Mr. Trump's son-in-law
and top adviser, Jared Kushner,
heads back to Capitol Hill.
We talk to two members
of Congress who are
asking questions about
Russian meddling.
And feeding children after
the school year - - how a food
bank is helping fill in the
gap during summer, so
kids don't go hungry.
JACKIE CAMBRIDGE, Meal Service
Manager: There's always a whew
when we get it out the door.
And then we just hope that
it's getting to kids in need,
and that they're enjoying it,
and we do it all
again the next day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United
States Senate tonight
has begun debating what
to do about Obamacare
after weeks of waiting.
Republicans finally mustered
the votes to proceed in a
showdown today, with the aid
of a cancer patient and a
vice presidential tiebreaker.
Lisa Desjardins
begins our coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the Senate
today, high-stakes politics
with high-volume drama.
As the health care vote began,
protesters chanted "Kill the
bill" and "Shame" from the
Senate gallery.
After they were removed, the
vote itself was in doubt.
Republican Senator Susan
Collins of Maine and Lisa
Murkowski of Alaska voted no.
One more no, and the
debate would be blocked.
All eyes were on Wisconsin
Republican Ron Johnson, who
didn't initially vote at all.
He spent minutes speaking with
GOP Leader Mitch McConnell,
before he finally voted yes.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States: On this vote,
the yeas 50 and the nays are
50.
The Senate, being
equally divided, the
vice president votes in
the affirmative, and the
motion is agreed to.
LISA DESJARDINS: Vice
President Mike Pence cast
the tiebreaking 51st vote.
Majority Leader McConnell:
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader: We have
wrestled with this issue.
We have watched the
consequences of the status quo.
The people who sent us here
expect us to begin this debate.
LISA DESJARDINS: Adding to the
emotion, the return of Arizona
Senator John McCain following
his diagnosis with brain cancer.
He voted for debate.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona: I
voted for the motion to proceed
to allow debate to continue
and amendments be offered.
I will not vote for this
bill as it is today.
It's a shell of
a bill right now.
We all know that.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's still far
from clear what, if any bill
will ultimately emerge from
the Senate.
The multiple versions include
the original Senate bill, with
dramatic reductions in Medicaid
and an end to most
of Obamacare's taxes.
The Congressional Budget Office
said it would leave 22 million
more people uninsured by
2026.
Last week came talk of a full
repeal bill, with a replacement
to be determined later.
That would mean 32 million
more uninsured if no
replacement is ever enacted.
And, finally, what's
called a skinny repeal,
ending Obamacare's
individual mandate, but
not much else.
It would likely add another
15 million uninsured.
Democrats remained uniformly
opposed, and their leader, Chuck
Schumer, condemned Republican
maneuvering.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: Now the best the
majority leader's been able to
cook up is a vague plan to
do whatever it takes to pass
something, anything, to get
the bill to a House and Senate
conference on health care.
My colleagues, plain
and simple, it's a ruse.
The likeliest result of a
conference between the House
and Senate is full repeal of the
Affordable Care Act, or
something very close to it.
LISA DESJARDINS: From the
other end of Pennsylvania
Avenue, President Trump
hailed the vote to
start debate.
DONALD TRUMP, President
of the United States:
I want to congratulate
American people, because
we're going to give
you great health care.
And we're going to get rid of
Obamacare, which should've been
frankly terminated long Ago.
It's been a disaster
for the American people.
LISA DESJARDINS: As for the
House, Majority Leader Kevin
McCarthy said, today, his caucus
is waiting for the
Senate's next move.
REP.
KEVIN MCCARTHY (R-CA),
House Majority Leader:
We will be on call.
At any time that the Senate
is able to pass a health care
bill -- we have already passed
one -- that we will call the
House back in to finish the job.
LISA DESJARDINS: But when
that day might come, if it
comes, remains a mystery.
Again, the vote today
was just to start debate.
Over the next two days
and likely nights,
we will see scores of
amendments and amendment
votes on the Senate floor.
Any senator can
offer an amendment.
In fact, Democrat Chris
Murphy says, Judy, he has
got 100 ready to propose.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa,
tell us more about how
this is going to work.
The Republicans have
been saying, for example,
there is going to be a
vote on straight repeal.
When would that be?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
This is going to be important
to follow the process.
Votes could happen as
soon as tonight, though
I'm told by sources in
both parties that that's
unlikely at this time.
Here's how it's likely to work.
We will see two large amendments
being proposed near the
top of this voting scheme.
One will be that
straight repeal bill.
The other will be some version
of the Senate bill that we
have seen crafted recently.
Both of those are
expected to fail.
After that, we will see perhaps
a day or many hours of a
flurry of different amendments.
Those will generally
require 60 votes.
It will be hard
for those to pass.
In the very end, Judy, we will
see probably this skinny repeal,
a sort of pared-down version
of repeal.
It will be the
Republicans' last vote.
They hope to get 50 on that.
It's not clear yet
how they will do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, this
was quite an extraordinary
day, as you just showed in your
piece.
You were there.
What does this drama say about
the state of the Senate right
now, this debate, and the
state of governing?
LISA DESJARDINS: Judy, I have to
tell you, it was breathtaking.
It was rather unbelievable
to be in that Senate today.
For one, as Susan Collins and
Lisa Murkowski, the senators who
voted no, cast those opposing
votes, they stood up.
They were emphatic
about their positions.
And at that time, Judy, looking
around the chamber, it was
clear that Republicans didn't
know if they were going
to pass this bill.
I looked down below me, and I
saw Vice President Pence write
on a sheet of paper, "The Senate
will be in recess."
That made it clear that they
were ready to lose this vote.
When Ron Johnson came in to
vote yes, they weren't sure
how it was going to end up.
Judy, I think that's
an indication of where
we are in general.
They don't know how
they finish this.
They're glad to open
the process, but much
is still in flux.
They also don't know, we don't
know if anyone is willing to
compromise, as Senator McCain
asked for today on the floor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So much to watch.
Lisa Desjardins with
another long day at the
Capitol, thank you, Lisa.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will talk
to Montana Senator Jon Tester
about the day's drama right
after the news summary.
In the day's other news:
President Trump today
kept sawing on the tree
limb where he's recently
placed his attorney
general, Jeff Sessions.
He charged that Sessions has
been very weak on investigating
Hillary Clinton, and needs
to be -- quote --
"much tougher."
As for whether Sessions will
keep his job, the president
said, "Time will tell."
One of Mr. Trump's
advisers said he probably
wants Sessions to resign.
We will have a full report
later in the program.
The State Department denied
today that Secretary of
State Rex Tillerson is
increasingly frustrated
in his job.
Several news outlets reported
that the former ExxonMobil
chief is chafing at curbs on his
independence.
The reports said he's
told friends that he
may not last a year.
But spokesperson Heather
Nauert rejected any such talk.
HEATHER NAUERT, State Department
Spokeswoman: That is false.
We have spoken
with the secretary.
The secretary has been very
clear he intends to stay
here at State Department.
We have a lot of work that is
left to be done ahead of us.
He recognizes that.
He is deeply engaged
in that work.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nauert said
that Tillerson is currently
taking a little time off.
The U.S. House of
Representatives today
voted overwhelmingly to
impose new sanctions on
Russia, partly over its
meddling in the 2016 election.
This bars President Trump
from relaxing the penalties
without congressional approval.
Meanwhile, in the Russia
investigations, the president's
son-in-law, Jared Kushner, met
privately with the House
Intelligence Committee.
And former Trump campaign
manager Paul Manafort spoke
with Senate Intelligence
Committee staffers.
We will return to this
story later in the program.
In Jerusalem, Muslim
clerics urged worshipers
to keep up protests and
avoid entering a contested
holy site until further notice.
They had objected to Israel
installing metal detectors at
the Temple Mount/Noble Sanctuary
site after an attack on police.
Overnight, the Israelis
dismantled the metal detectors,
in favor of high-tech cameras,
but protests continued
and Palestinian officials
remained adamant.
RAMI HAMDALLAH, Prime Minister,
Palestinian National Authority
(through translator): We
condemn all the Israeli
measures that take away our
people's right for worship.
We reject all obstacles that
hinder the freedom of worship
granted by international laws.
And we demand that we
return to the situation
where things stood before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Palestinians
warned that the new cameras
could see through clothing and
embarrass female worshipers.
Israeli police said they
will not use cameras that
violate anyone's privacy.
An outbreak of cholera
in Yemen was set to reach
400,000 cases today.
It has struck a
population already
ravaged by war and hunger.
We have a report from Neil
Connery of Independent
Television News.
But be aware, some of the images
are graphic and disturbing.
NEIL CONNERY: Tagrid Tatan
barely has the strength to cry.
She's 12 years old.
For months, Yemen's children
have paid the highest price in
a war now in its third year.
Zara is 15.
This is what hunger
has done to her.
And now a cholera epidemic
is spreading, with more
than 5,000 cases every day.
At Todada (ph) hospital, they're
overwhelmed by cholera victims.
More than 40 percent of
those affected are children.
Yemen was already on its
knees, but now a disease which
should have been left in the
19th century is in every
part of the country.
In the villages, this waterborne
infection is claiming lives,
as one father who lost
his 4-year-old
son, Ali, told us.
MAN (through translator): My
son died of cholera because the
water is contaminated, and we
do not have a solution
for this well.
We need a solution to
stop this illness that
has killed our children.
NEIL CONNERY: In the
nearby clinic, Tagrid
is finally receiving
help, but, across Yemen,
hunger and cholera cast
the darkest of shadows.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So hard to watch
that report from Neil Connery
of Independent Television
News.
The U.S. and Iran have
had a new confrontation in
the Northern Persian Gulf.
An American patrol ship
fired warning shots today
near an Iranian vessel.
U.S. military officials
said it ignored warnings
and came within 150 yards.
Iran's Revolutionary Guard
charged that the U.S. vessel
provoked the incident.
There's word that North Korea
could field an intercontinental
ballistic missile that
can carry a nuclear warhead
to a target by next year.
The Washington Post is reporting
the new Pentagon estimate shaves
two years off the previous
forecast.
U.S. intelligence analysts say
that the North could conduct
new missile tests this week
during a national holiday.
Upbeat corporate profits pushed
Wall Street higher today.
The Dow Jones industrial
average gained 100
points to close at 21613.
The Nasdaq rose one point,
and the S&P 500 added seven.
And Barbara Sinatra died
today at her home in
Rancho Mirage, California.
She became Frank Sinatra's
fourth wife in 1976, and the
union lasted until the legendary
singer's own death in 1998.
With his help, the former
showgirl-turned-socialite
raised millions of
dollars to help abused
children.
Barbara Sinatra
was 90 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what's next for the nation's
health care, the president's
public criticism of his own
attorney general, Jeff Sessions;
we talk to members of the House
Intelligence Committee about
Jared Kushner's contacts
with Russia; and much more.
As we heard, it was a dramatic
and consequential return for
John McCain to the Senate floor,
his first public appearance
since being diagnosed
with brain cancer.
While his vote helped
Republicans open up
debate on health care,
he laid out the difficult
road ahead to replace
the Affordable Care Act,
and he called on his
colleagues to change
the tone and behavior of the
Senate more broadly as well.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona:
Our deliberations can
still be important and
useful, but I think
we'd all agree they
haven't been overburdened
by greatness lately.
And, right now, they
aren't producing much
for the American people.
Both sides have let this happen.
Let's leave the history of who
shot first to the historians.
I suspect they will find we
all conspired in our decline,
either by deliberate actions
or neglect.
We have all played
some role in it.
Certainly, I have.
Sometimes, I have let my
passion rule my reason.
Sometimes, I made it harder
to find common ground because
of something harsh I said to
a colleague.
Sometimes, I wanted to win more
for the sake of winning than
to achieve a contested policy.
I hope we can again
rely on humility, on our
need to cooperate, on
our dependence on each
other to learn how to trust
each other again and by so doing
better serve the people who
elected us.
Stop listening to the bombastic
loudmouths on the radio and
television and the Internet.
To hell with them.
(APPLAUSE)
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN: They don't
want anything done
for the public good.
Let's trust each other.
Let's return to regular order.
We have been spinning our
wheels on too many important
issues because we keep trying to
find a way to win without
help from across the aisle.
That's an approach that's
been employed by both sides,
mandating legislation from the
top down, without any support
from the other side, with all
the parliamentary maneuvers
that requires.
We're getting nothing
done, my friends.
We're getting nothing done.
And all we have really done
this year is confirm Neil
Gorsuch to the Supreme Court.
Our health care insurance
system is a mess.
We all know it, those
who support Obamacare
and those who oppose it.
Something has to be done.
We Republicans have looked for
a way to end it and replace
it with something else without
paying a terrible
political price.
We haven't found it yet.
And I'm not sure we will.
All we have managed to do is
make more popular a policy that
wasn't very popular when we
started trying to get rid of it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator
John McCain on the
Senate floor today.
We asked more than 20 Republican
senators to join us tonight.
None accepted our invitation.
But we stay on Capitol Hill
for a Democrat's perspective.
He is Senator Jon
Tester of Montana.
He has served in the
Senate since 2007.
Senator, we're very glad
to have you join us.
What did you make of what
John McCain had to say today?
SEN.
JON TESTER (D), Montana:
Well, I think he was spot on.
John's a statesman, and he
certainly has respects from
both sides of the aisle.
But this place is broken.
And we do need to work across
the aisle, and compromise
shouldn't be a dirty word.
And we need to negotiate and
we need to take everybody's
input and come up with the best
possible legislation.
And that's certainly not what
happened with the health care
bill that we have dealt with
over the last seven months, the
various ones that have come out.
But the bottom
line is this, Judy.
This country was built by
people working together.
Washington, D.C., is far,
far, far too partisan.
And we need to start
working together.
And I think John McCain
is right on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there any sign
that that's going to happen?
Is one senator's speech
on the floor going
to make a difference?
SEN.
JON TESTER: Well, no,
I think it's going to
take more than that.
And I will just tell you that
I am blessed to be able to
work with a guy by the name
of Johnny Isakson
on the VA Committee.
And together, a Republican
and a Democrat, along with a
really good committee, have been
able to pump out some pretty
good bills that the president
has been able to sign.
And we have done that by
communicating with one another,
not embarrassing one another,
but working for the best
interests of our veterans.
And I think that if the Senate
would take a look at the
successes we have had over the
last many years, it's been
by people communicating
and working together and
negotiating and compromising.
And I think we start
to doing that more and
more in the Senate.
And there is no better place
to start than with a bill
that impacts one-sixth of our
economy, this health care bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
about that health care bill.
Now that Republicans have
been able to get it on the
floor, debate has begun.
Do they have the votes, do you
believe, to get it to a point
where they repeal the Affordable
Care Act and come up with a
substitute that they like?
SEN.
JON TESTER: I have no idea,
because I don't know of anybody
that voted today that knew
what they were voting on.
They were voting on potentially
a House bill that was going
to be replaced with something
else, but we don't
know what it is.
And I will go back to
John McCain's words.
Let's go back to the
committee process and
start working together.
But that's going to have to be
something that Mitch McConnell
requires, rather than trying
to craft something with a
limited number of people and
a limited number of input that
actually doesn't move the health
care system forward and make
it more accessible and more
affordable, especially for
folks in Middle America,
because we really get pounded by
proposals like the House
bill or, what's even
worse, the Senate health
care bill that came
forth.
I mean, it could literally shut
down health care facilities.
And that's what they have told
me as I have gone around the
state and visited face-to-face
with these folks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Senator,
what we're hearing now is what
-- the version that may have the
best chance is what
they're calling skinny
repeal, which wouldn't
do away with everything,
but it would do away with
the individual mandate.
It would do away, I gather,
with employer mandate penalty
and the medical device tax.
Is that something that comes
any closer to a consensus?
SEN.
JON TESTER: I don't know that
that's the kind of reform that
we need in our health care
system.
And I think it may be more of
a bait-and-switch to be able to
get a bill that you could get
a number of votes to pass
it out and then take it to
conference and replace with it
a really bad bill.
And that's my concern.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you don't
think that that version, which
some Republicans are saying
would make them happy, bring
some conservatives on board, and
perhaps entice moderates, you're
saying you don't see
that as moving the ball?
SEN.
JON TESTER: Look, I don't think
it's going the move the ball.
I think there is
another agenda here.
And the agenda is to do some
really bad things with Medicaid
expansion and to block-grant
Medicaid, which really hurts
rural states - - I think it
hurts the whole country -- and
not to address preexisting
conditions and lifetime caps.
And if that's the direction
we're headed, then that's not
the direction I want to go.
I think that that skinny
bill, that bait-and-switch
bill, whatever you
want to call it, Trojan
horse repeal bill, that bill
is not where we will end up at.
And I don't think you get the
conservatives with that bill.
And I don't think you
get the moderates either.
So, I think what's
happened here is, you
have got Mitch McConnell,
who has his vote today
on something we don't know
what it is going to end up at,
and him crafting another bill
to put it up to be able to
change the bill in conference.
That's all very convoluted,
in the weeds, but that's
where we're headed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Senator, you
mentioned Medicaid expansion
in your own state of Montana.
I'm reading an Associated Press
report that talks about the
number of Medicaid enrollees
having far exceeded the
number that were expected.
A number of people in
your state worrying this
program can't be sustained.
I guess they were expecting
maybe 30,000 to sign up.
It's been 80,000
who have signed up.
And there's worry that
Montana can't continue this.
Isn't this the exact sort
of thing that Republicans
say is what making this
whole process unsustainable?
SEN.
JON TESTER: I think the
Medicaid expansion has been an
incredible success in Montana
and has really helped people
get health care for the first
time in their life, the working
folks out there that couldn't
afford health care before.
I think this is
about priorities.
And if our priority is to make
sure that people have access
to affordable health care, then
we need to move forward.
But we have got 77,000
folks that signed up for
Medicaid expansion in
the state of a million
and 50,000 people.
I don't think that's
necessarily a bad thing.
I think it's a good thing,
because now we have people
that are going to school that
are healthy, that are going to
work that are healthy, that own
small businesses that healthier,
and I think it's an
important step to take.
But I think it's
about priorities.
We need to make health care
a priority in this country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democratic
Senator Jon Tester of Montana,
we thank you very much.
SEN.
JON TESTER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The escalation
of President Trump's criticism
of Jeff Sessions exposes
a rare public divide between
an American president
and his attorney general.
Jeffrey Brown reports.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: I'm disappointed
in the attorney general.
He shouldn't have
recused himself.
JEFFREY BROWN: The
president's latest salvo
came this afternoon,
at his news conference
with Lebanon's prime minister.
That followed a morning
broadside on Twitter, declaring:
"Attorney General Jeff Sessions
has taken a very weak
position on Hillary Clinton
crimes and intel leakers."
And, yesterday, another
tweet that called
Sessions "our beleaguered
A.G." and plaintively
asked why he's not
investigating Hillary Clinton.
So, what is next?
The president said this today:
DONALD TRUMP: I want
the attorney general
to be much tougher on
leaks from intelligence
agencies.
We will see what happens.
Time will tell.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sessions
was a veteran Republican
senator from Alabama,
and in early 2016 became
the first in that body to
endorse the Trump candidacy.
After he won, president-elect
Trump nominated him
as attorney general.
But less than a month after
Sessions' confirmation,
it emerged that,
despite earlier denials,
he had, in fact, met with
the Russian ambassador
during the campaign.
JEFF SESSIONS, U.S. Attorney
General: I shouldn't be involved
in any campaign investigation.
JEFFREY BROWN: In early March,
Sessions he recused himself from
Russia-related investigations,
a decision still angers the
president, as he made clear to
The New York Times last week.
DONALD TRUMP: How do you take a
job, and then recuse yourself?
If he would have recused
himself before the job, I would
have said, thanks, Jeff, but
I can't -- I'm not
going to take you.
It's extremely unfair,
and that's a mild
word, to the president.
JEFFREY BROWN: The next
day, Sessions said he
has no plans to resign.
JEFF SESSIONS: We love this job.
We love this department.
And I plan to continue to do so
as long as that is appropriate.
JEFFREY BROWN: The attorney
general has not been heard from
since, but several Republican
senators have rallied to
their former colleague.
Today, South Carolina's Lindsey
Graham called the president's
rebuke of Sessions for not
prosecuting Hillary Clinton
highly inappropriate.
And Utah's Orrin Hatch
said he was surprised.
SEN.
ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah:
Jeff has been very loyal
to the president, and
I think he deserves
loyalty back.
JEFFREY BROWN: Democrats warned
that forcing out Sessions
would spark a new firestorm.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: Many Americans must
be wondering if the president
is trying to pry open the office
of attorney general to appoint
someone during the August
recess who will fire special
counsel Mueller and shut down
the Russia investigation.
JEFFREY BROWN: Even so, the
new White House communications
director, Anthony Scaramucci,
told conservative radio
host Hugh Hewitt that
the die may be cast.
HUGH HEWITT, Radio Talk
Show Host: It's clear
the president wants him
gone, isn't it, Anthony?
ANTHONY SCARAMUCCI, White House
Communications Director: I have
an enormous amount of respect
for the attorney general,
but I do know the
president pretty well.
And if there's this
level of tension in the
relationship, that that's
public, you're probably
right.
DONALD TRUMP: A Scout is
trustworthy, loyal - - we
could use some more loyalty.
I will tell you that.
JEFFREY BROWN: that level of
tension may have been in play
last night at the Boy Scouts'
National Jamboree.
The president brought
with him Cabinet members
and former Scouts Ryan
Zinke and Rick Perry,
but Eagle Scout Jeff Sessions
was nowhere to be seen.
A very high-level rift
now out in the open.
We get more from our own John
Yang, reporting from the White
House, and Sari Horwitz, who
covers the Justice Department
for The Washington Post.
John, you were at that
press conference today.
Where does this leave things
as far as Jeff Sessions
holding on to his job?
JOHN YANG: Well, you know,
the president rejected
the suggestion of a
reporter that he had been
leaving Jeff Sessions slowly
twisting in the wind, to
use an old Watergate phrase.
But, at the same time, as you
heard in your report, he said
he's got no timeline for when
he's going to make a decision.
It is clear that the president
sees a direct line from Jeff
Sessions' recusing himself
from the Russia investigation
to the appointment of
Robert Mueller as the
special counsel and
this investigation that
is dogging him still.
He told The Wall Street Journal
in an interview before that news
conference, if Jeff Sessions
didn't recuse himself, we
wouldn't even be talking
about this subject.
So it's clear he is still very
frustrated, very, in his words,
disappointed in his attorney
general.
JEFFREY BROWN: And,
Sari Horwitz, is there
anything more coming out
of the Justice Department?
Do we know how the attorney
general is taking all this?
SARI HORWITZ, The Washington
Post: Well, you know, it's just
been an extraordinary spectacle
playing out here in Washington.
And I have been at the Justice
Department all day, and all
indications are that Jeff
Sessions is not going to resign
and that he's moving forward
with his conservative agenda.
He, really more than any other
Cabinet member, has been putting
many place, moving quickly,
methodically to undo Holder,
Eric Holder, and Obama policies
at the Justice Department,
and he's moving forward on that.
He's compartmentalizing these
disparaging comments by the
president, which I'm being
told by people at the Justice
Department he's been doing since
he got in as attorney general
in February.
You know, he recused himself
in March, and this has
been going on since March.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sari, you and
your colleagues reported today
on discussions within the White
House about replacing
Jeff Sessions and how
that might happen.
So, those discussions
are taking place?
SARI HORWITZ: We heard they
had been taking place up until
now, but it's interesting.
Today, the conservative media,
Breitbart, Rush Limbaugh,
conservative senators came
out and said, we like the
policies Jeff Sessions
has been putting in place.
And actually, today, late
afternoon, Jeff Sessions
announced another new
policy, a conservative
policy, to crack down
on so-called sanctuary
cities and tie very
important federal grants
to local cities and
states, to tie those
grants to restrictions.
Like, if the states seem to be
harboring illegal immigrants,
undocumented immigrants, they
won't give them the money.
And what we're hearing is,
tomorrow or the next day, he's
going to be announcing that
the Justice Department is indeed
doing leak investigations.
JEFFREY BROWN: John, what do
you make of the support that
has been ever more vocal today,
in fact, for Jeff Sessions
from friends and allies?
JOHN YANG: Well, I think,
Jeff, it really is one of the
conundrums of this, is that
he is extremely popular among
Mr. Trump's base, largely
because of what Sari has just
been talking about, his
stand on illegal immigration,
on sanctuary cities.
Remember that he was actually
Steve Bannon's first choice
to be a presidential candidate
because of his
immigration policies.
But then it became clear
that he wasn't going to run.
So I think that -- and one
of the outside people that
President Trump talked to, has
been talking to about this
tells me that this is something
he did remind him, that Jeff
Sessions is very
popular among his base.
And you heard it from
a lot of particularly
Southern conservative
Democrats on the hill
today.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, John, we
did hear also at the press
conference the president again
raising the issue
of leaks today.
So, that remains
connected to all of this.
JOHN YANG: And you also have
to wonder if that's -- if
what he's talking about with
his tweets -- and, by the way,
you know, as Sari points out,
he is going after a member
of his own Cabinet as if he was
one of his primary opponents
in last year's election
- - if this constant
pressure on Sessions isn't
some sort of leverage to
get the Justice Department
to act on these leaks, which
have been his real bugaboo in
all these stories coming out
of the Russia investigation.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sari,
just in our last 30
seconds, what about that?
What about the leaks
connection to all this sort
of public furor we're hearing?
SARI HORWITZ: We know Trump is
angry about the leaks, and as
I said, we have been hearing
late afternoon at the Justice
Department that within the next
day or two Attorney General
Sessions is going to make an
announcement that the Justice
Department has been doing
leak investigations, maybe
showing his tougher side to the
president, and indicating that,
along with illegal immigration
and criminal justice policy,
he's also moving forward on
finding the leakers.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sari Horwitz of
The Washington Post, and John
Yang, our own, thank you both
very much.
SARI HORWITZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
the difficult task
of feeding low-income
students when school's
out for the summer; and
Seattle's new seawall that
doubles as a science experiment.
But first: the investigation
into Russian meddling
in the 2016 election.
Late today, the Senate Judiciary
Committee rescinded its subpoena
for former Trump campaign
manager Paul Manafort.
Negotiations continue on
when and how he will testify.
Earlier, it was round
two for Jared Kushner.
The president's son-in-law and
senior adviser answered more
questions on Capitol Hill about
his interactions with
Russian officials during
the campaign and beyond.
William Brangham has that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Yesterday, Kushner released
an 11-page document
detailing several meetings
he had with Russian citizens
and officials while working on
his father-in-law's campaign
and transition.
Kushner said there was
absolutely no collusion
and no improper contacts,
even though he initially
failed to disclose these
meetings, as required by law.
For more on this, we talk with
two lawmakers who questioned
Kushner today in that closed
session.
First, earlier today, I spoke
with Republican Congressman
Chris Stewart of Utah, who's on
the House Intelligence
Committee.
I asked him what questions he
had going into today's meeting.
REP.
CHRIS STEWART (R), Utah: You
know, we wanted to know some
of the details about obviously
his meetings with some of the
people associated with Russia
and who set up those meetings,
what he knew about those
meetings, what came
out of those meetings.
I got to tell you, though, that
for those who are hoping and
looking for the impeachment
of Donald Trump, Jared
Kushner is not that guy.
I mean, he's not going to
carry that narrative chord.
He's very sincere, very honest,
and he just didn't have much
to add to this story in those
who are looking for
evidence of collusion.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One
of the issues that I
know came up yesterday,
and I'm assuming today,
was his federal disclosure
form, where he, as an incoming
member of the administration,
is supposed to disclose all
these meetings he may have
had with foreign officials.
And apparently he had to
update that document three
different times, saying
he forgot initially.
He chalked it up yesterday to
something of a rookie mistake.
Did your questions to him today
assuage any doubts you might
have about that particular
issue?
REP.
CHRIS STEWART: Yes, you
know, that was one things
we did want to talk about.
And it really was
answered I think to all
of our satisfaction.
And it's really very simple.
The SF-86 is a very
complicated document.
I had to do one as
an Air Force pilot.
You go back 10 years, in
some cases, more than that.
You have to provide in
some cases hundreds of
pages of information.
And it's not at all unusual
for someone to update or
to modify that document.
In fact, they expect
that you will.
They expect that, as you kind
of dive into this process,
you're going to remember things.
And in this case, the
explanation was even
more simple than that.
It was more than it is
a complicated document.
It was that they admit that
they filed that document by
mistake and didn't have some of
this information on.
But they recognized that
immediately, and within
a day had updated it.
And so it wasn't just
Russian officials that
they didn't include.
There were officials with
-- or meetings with King
Abdullah, a meeting with
some other -- Benjamin
Netanyahu, people that they
clearly would have remembered.
They just didn't have it on that
form, recognized that error,
and, I would say within 24 hours
had already corrected it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There is
also a question about whether
Kushner had participated in
or asked the Russian ambassador
to help set up this back-channel
line of communications
with the Russians.
Did you talk with him
about that today, and what
did he say about that?
REP.
CHRIS STEWART: Yes, our
conclusion is that he
didn't intend for there
to be any back-channel
communications.
It was just to facilitate
what they thought was
one conversation that
some Russian officials
wanted to have about, you know,
developing relationships with
the incoming administration.
They didn't have any secure
phones, and so they just simply
asked, do you have a secure
phone?
That conversation didn't take
place, and that was really kind
of the beginning and end of
it.
So, it is one of those things
where you do wonder when you
hear about this and you read
the press reports, but then
when you actually have a chance
to talk to the witness, you
realize, again, there is a
very reasonable explanation for
it, and there isn't much more
to pursue.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Some of your
colleagues and some others
have said that, given the
questions swirling around
Kushner, that he shouldn't have
a security clearance to see
top-secret national
security information.
Do you think that that's
-- do you think he should
lose his privileges?
REP.
CHRIS STEWART: No, I
just think that's nuts.
Look, if he's this done
something wrong and if
someone has evidence
that he did something
wrong and that we can actually
say, OK, that's a security
violation or a security concern,
then, well, let's
deal with that.
But if your only objection
to him is saying that he had
to add additional information
to this form that they
requested, then I just
think it's inappropriate
for someone to say
that that would preclude
him from holding a
security clearance.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Lastly,
Congressman, just shifting
gears a tiny bit, the president,
as you know, has been
quite tough recently on
his attorney general.
And I'm just curious
for your take on that.
As a member of his own party,
what does that atmosphere do
to this ongoing investigation?
REP.
CHRIS STEWART: Yes.
You know, I support our
president and I defend
him when it's appropriate
when I think that
he's being, you know, unfairly
attacked or criticized.
But, on the other hand,
there are times when
I disagree with him.
And this is one of those times.
I think the attorney general
is one of the most honorable,
sincere men in government.
That's certainly been my
interactions with him.
And when you see him testify
and others, I think most
American people feel that that
way.
And I don't -- just
don't understand why he
wouldn't and I, in fact,
expect that he should
continue as our
attorney general.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Congressman Chris Stewart, thank
you very much for being here.
REP.
CHRIS STEWART: All
right, thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And now for
a view from across the aisle,
I'm joined by Congressman
Adam Schiff of California.
He's the top Democrat on the
House Intelligence Committee.
Congressman, so, you had chance
to talk to Jared Kushner today.
What were your
questions going in?
And do you feel like he
answered them satisfactorily?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF (D), California:
We had a variety of
questions certainly
about the four meetings
that he disclosed in his public
statement the other day, but
about a lot of other areas
as well.
We're looking at any of the
Russian active measures that
may have been employed here
that we know they
employ in other places.
We're looking at allegations
concerning the social media
campaign, whether there was any
kind of cooperation or
coordination through
Cambridge Analytica.
We're looking at some of the
financial issues, because one
of the things that the Russians
do is, they use financial
leverage, or sometimes
they develop what the
Russians call kompromat
by engaging in a list of
transactions with people as a
way of being able to hold that
over their head.
So, we went, with this witness,
as we do with all, over the
whole range of our concerns
to do the best we can to get to
the bottom of these allegations.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's
talk about some of those
particular allegations.
One of them was this issue of
this federal disclosure form,
where he failed initially
to reveal that he had these
meetings with dozens of foreign
nationals, including these
meetings with the Russians.
Jared Kushner yesterday said
that this was an innocent
mistake, that this was basically
a rookie error.
Do you buy that as an excuse?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well, he doesn't
strike me as a rookie.
I think he's quite
sophisticated.
I don't want to
characterize his testimony.
We actually don't really go
into the details of testimony.
I was surprised that
my colleague was
willing to do that.
I will say this, that the holder
of that clearance, I do believe,
needs to investigate this to
find out whether Mr. Kushner's
explanations are satisfactory,
what the circumstances are,
what was disclosed,
what wasn't disclosed.
We have not yet
obtained the SF-86s.
So we're really not in a
position to evaluate what
and when he disclosed
different things.
But I do believe that other
individuals, not the son-in-law
of the president, if they were
to fail to disclose a meeting
that they attended that was with
people acting on behalf of the
Russian government, promising
dirt on a political opponent, or
a meeting that wasn't disclosed
that involved setting up a
secret back channel at a Russian
diplomatic facility, it is very
unlikely that an ordinary
individual would be allowed
to keep their clearance.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's touch
on a few other issues that are
swirling in Washington right
now.
Obviously, as you have been
hearing in our broadcast, the
president has been very tough
on Attorney General Sessions.
Many people believe that the
president would like him to
either leave or would like to
fire him.
If that were to happen,
what would that do to these
ongoing investigations?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well, I
think you're right.
In this case, the president
is being very transparent, at
least as far as his intentions
are concerned.
He wants to force Jeff Sessions
to resign, and, therefore, he
would less have his fingerprints
on hit than if he
fired Jeff Sessions.
And I think the motivation
is quite simple.
He wants to appoint a
more malleable attorney
general when it comes to
the Russia investigation
who is not recused, who can
tell Bob Mueller, you will look
at this, but you won't look
at these other areas that are
evidently so concerning to the
president, including whether
there was any money-laundering
going on with the
Trump Organization.
What should we do about it?
If there is any effort
to interfere with Bob
Mueller's investigation,
we may need to reenact
the independent counsel law,
and make sure that Bob Mueller
has a completely free hand
to look at anything relevant
to the Russia investigation
or that arises from it, which
is his charter now, but
something clearly the president
is uncomfortable with.
The president needs
to understand this is
not his prerogative
to determine what the
investigators are
investigating when it
involves his own organization.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I'm curious
what you think, though.
The president has said --
what's really relevant here is
probably what the GOP would do.
If Sessions were fired, we heard
today many, many senators and
congressmen supporting Jeff
Sessions, but we also
heard Speaker Ryan saying
that, in essence, it
is the president's job
to determine who
is in his Cabinet.
Do you think if this -- if
Sessions were to be let go, that
the GOP would -- there would
be a revolt in his own party?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: I would certainly
hope that that would be the
case, if he either pushes Jeff
Sessions out or he were to
fire Bob Mueller, that both
Democrats and Republicans would
rise to their institutional
responsibility of insisting that
an independent investigation
go forth.
I think it would be a
constitutional crisis.
And I have to say, I'm deeply
disappointed once again to
hear the speaker so downplay
the significance of this,
because that only encourages the
president to engage in conduct
which is, I think, very
seriously at odds with our
system of checks and balances.
When we meet with emerging
democracies, we always
emphasize a couple things.
We emphasize, when you
win an election, you don't
jail the losing party.
And, here, one of the gripes
apparently the president has
is that Jeff Sessions is not
acting to try to
investigate and prosecute
his political opponent.
That is something you see
in a banana republic, not in
the United States of America.
So, members of both
parties need to speak out.
We shouldn't wait until
there is a crisis to do so.
And I hope the speaker
will think better of
what he just said.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Lastly,
quickly, Congressman,
the president clearly
still chafes at this
Russia investigation.
And his new communications
director today seemed
to indicate that
the president still
doesn't believe that Russia
was actually involved in trying
to meddle in our election.
Given that huge chasm
between what our intelligence
agencies believe and what
the president believes,
how can this really go forward?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well, look, there
is only really one person in
America that doesn't believe
the Russians were involved
in hacking our election.
And that's, unfortunately,
the president.
Even Vladimir Putin, of course,
knows exactly what he's done,
so Russia is under no illusion
about this.
What does this
mean going forward?
It means, of greater
significance to the
country, that we are not
taking the steps to prepare
ourselves when the
Russians intervene again.
And that is very serious,
because there is no
software patch here.
We're not going to be able
to make the DNC or the RNC
immune from Russian hacking.
They're too good, and it's
too difficult to defend.
The only real defense the
country has is to bring
the country together
to forge a consensus
that, no matter who it helps
or who it hurts, we will
reject foreign interference.
And our president is simply
not doing that, and this is
exposing us to further harm.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Congressman Adam Schiff of
California, thanks very much.
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For American
children, summer is supposed
to be a time of fun and games,
but, for many, it is
also a time of true need.
During the school year,
roughly 22 million children
in this country get
free and reduced-price
lunch.
In the summer, those
numbers drop dramatically.
Just under four million have
access to subsidized meals.
There are 50,000 locations
providing summer meals, but
reaching those who need the food
can be a challenge.
Special PBS correspondent Lisa
Stark of our partner Education
Week traveled to Nebraska
to see how one food bank
is trying to fill the gap.
LISA STARK: It's a scorching
summer day in Plattsmouth,
Nebraska, about 40 minutes south
of Omaha, as the food
truck lumbers into view.
Despite the heat, families are
lining up for lunch at what's
called Kids Cruisin' Kitchen.
BECKY HAM, Parent:
They get milk.
They get fruit and vegetables.
It's really a nice program.
LISA STARK: Becky Ham and
her children rely on the food
truck a few times a week.
BECKY HAM: We started doing this
about three summers ago when
my husband lost his job right
before the end of
the school year.
And we were really panicked
about how we were going
to make everything work.
LISA STARK: Ham's husband
has a new job, but the
budget remains tight.
The family still qualifies for
free school lunches, and is
thankful for the summer help.
BECKY HAM: It's really
helping kids out.
It's really helping families
out when they need it.
LISA STARK: Kids Cruisin'
Kitchen was launched six years
ago by Omaha's Food Bank for the
Heartland and Salvation Army.
With four food trucks and
10 fixed locations, it
serves 1,300 children a day.
Do you get enough to
eat at the food truck?
CHILD: MD-U They
give us a lot of meals.
LISA STARK: A lot of
meals and a lot of food?
CHILD: MD-U Yes.
LISA STARK: Yes?
Susan Ogborn is the
food bank president.
Who are you trying to help?
Who's your target here
for the summer meals?
SUSAN OGBORN, President,
Food Bank for the Heartland:
Primarily, the children of the
working poor.
They are the folks who won't
tell you that they need help.
They are the folks whose
children qualify for free
or reduced price-lunches.
LISA STARK: Preparing
these meals begins early
in the morning in an
industrial kitchen run
by an Omaha area
school district.
They make meals for Kids
Cruisin' Kitchen and other
summer meal programs.
JACKIE CAMBRIDGE, Meal Service
Manager: We do about 3,000
meals a day during the summer.
LISA STARK: In less than three
hours on this morning, corn
dogs are cooked, bananas packed,
chocolate milk readied, sack
lunches bagged, chicken patties,
fruit and veggies prepped
for later in the week.
JACKIE CAMBRIDGE: It's
the five food groups.
It's grains, meat,
fruit, vegetables, milk.
LISA STARK: Meals are paid
for by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, $3.83 each, and
must meet government nutrition
standards, which are a
bit looser in the summer.
Jackie Cambridge manages
this summer meal service.
JACKIE CAMBRIDGE: There's
always a whew when we
get it out the door.
And then we just hope that
it's getting to kids in need,
and that they're enjoying it,
and we do it all
again the next day.
LISA STARK: Shortly after 9:00
a.m., the Kids Cruisin' Kitchen
truck pulls up to load its
food, hot meals to go.
The truck makes four
stops each weekday during
most of the summer break.
After that first stop
in Plattsmouth, it's
off to a public library,
followed by a public
housing project, then onto an
affordable housing development,
areas where more than half of
children quality for free
and reduced-price lunch,
although anyone is welcome.
CHILD: You got corn dogs today?
Bananas.
LISA STARK: Summer lunches
are an outgrowth of subsidized
school lunches, which expanded
in the 1960s.
NARRATOR: A good lunch provides
from a third to one-half of
the student's daily needs.
LISA STARK: As part of President
Lyndon Johnson's war on poverty.
LYNDON JOHNSON, Former President
of the United States: Children
just must not go hungry.
LISA STARK: The programs
have grown enormously.
Today, 85 percent of all
breakfasts served at schools
and 73 percent of school lunches
are subsidized by the USDA;
12 million students depend on
breakfast, 22 million on lunch.
Nationwide, nearly 20
percent of children under
age 18 live in poverty.
That's 14.5 million children.
LAURA HATCH, No Kid Hungry:
Sometimes, schools are providing
the only meals that kids get
during the week.
LISA STARK: Laura Hatch is
With No Kid Hungry, a national
advocacy group trying to reduce
childhood hunger.
She says school meals
make a big difference.
LAURA HATCH: We know that
kids that eat breakfast
do better on math tests.
We know that serving breakfast
as part of the school day can
actually keep kids in their
seat and lessen absenteeism.
LISA STARK: Serving
school meals is easier.
Students are all in one place.
Summer meals are tougher.
The food has to get to
where the children are.
To make it work, the food bank
hires 10 temporary staffers, and
relies on 200 volunteers from
Mutual of Omaha.
This is Gary Hering's
third year helping out.
He understands hunger.
GARY HERING, Volunteer: There
were times when, as a family,
I know we struggled, and we'd
go visit relatives just to eat,
you know, have food every day.
LISA STARK: Do you think that's
true for some of these kids?
Or what do you think?
GARY HERING: You bet.
That's the best part about it
today, that these kids aren't
going to be hungry at lunch.
LISA STARK: Despite all this
effort by the food bank and
others, Nebraska ranks near
the bottom of all 50 states
when it comes to summer meals.
For every 100 children
who depend on the school
lunch program, only
eight are getting help
during the summer.
That's according to the Food
Research and Action Network,
which found that, last year,
nationwide, that gap between
filling the need during the
school year and the summer got
wider.
It's especially difficult to
reach children in rural areas.
They are spread out, and USDA
rules require all summer meals
to be served and eaten in
one place at one time.
WOMAN: You guys going to
eat it over here today, OK?
LISA STARK: Regulars, like
Michelle Brown and her sisters,
are well aware of the rules.
CHILD: You just have to,
like, eat here, and you
have to come on time.
LISA STARK: USDA has a pilot
program in seven states and two
tribal areas to help families
in need during the summer
by temporarily increasing
food stamps benefits.
Advocates would like this
program offered more widely.
Agriculture Secretary Sonny
Perdue, who recently visited a
summer meal site in Washington,
D.C., says he's
open to the idea.
SONNY PERDUE, U.S. Agriculture
Secretary: I don't think
any of us want to fast over
the summer, so just because
school stops doesn't mean that
the needs for good, nutritious,
healthy food and a good
environment doesn't stop.
LISA STARK: The food bank's
Susan Ogborn is eager to see
regulations relaxed to make it
easier to expand summer meals.
SUSAN OGBORN: The problem is,
children are hungry every day.
And so we hope that Secretary
Perdue and the rest of his team
at USDA get their rules and
regulations figured
out pretty quickly.
LISA STARK: For now, the food
bank will continue to roll along
with its current program, hoping
one day to reach many more
children, but committed
to the mostly satisfied
customers it already
has.
What do you think
about the food truck?
CHILD: I like it, but I would
love it if they added donuts.
LISA STARK: Maybe next summer.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Education Week, I'm Lisa
Stark in Omaha, Nebraska.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We
love donuts, too.
And now to our
"NewsHour" Shares.
Seawalls help to protect
developed shorelines,
but they can also
destroy crucial habitat.
One project in Washington
state aims to fix that.
Ken Christensen of
KCTS' EarthFix explains.
KEN CHRISTENSEN: The Seattle
waterfront is changing
right beneath your feet.
JEFF CORDELL, University of
Washington: When you walk along
Seattle's sidewalk, you will
be walking on glass panels.
KEN CHRISTENSEN: But look
deeper, and you will see that
the changes aren't for tourists.
They're for natives.
JEFF CORDELL: Their
function is to provide
light to help thousands
and thousands of little
baby salmon.
KEN CHRISTENSEN: It's
one feature of Seattle's
new seawall, a $400
million infrastructure
project that's doubling as a
really big science experiment,
the biggest of Jeff Cordell's
career.
JEFF CORDELL: Nothing has
ever been tried on this scale.
You're walking on foot after
foot after foot of new habitat.
KEN CHRISTENSEN: Cordell wants
to see if coastal cities can
better coexist with fish.
For 80 years, Seattle's seawall
was like most, a flat, concrete
slab that held back the sea,
but destroyed shallow
water habitat that
many species thrive on.
Every spring, young salmon
would migrate from Seattle's
Duwamish River to the ocean, and
they're hard-wired to stay
close to shore, which means
they run right into this.
In the inky darkness
under the pier, life can
get confusing for a fish.
JEFF CORDELL: There's
a good example of a
shadow line from a pier.
And they don't want to
cross the shadow line, so
they just mill about here.
KEN CHRISTENSEN: The new
seawall is supposed to make life
easier, not only by providing
a naturally lit corridor for
fish to pass through on their
way to the ocean, but also
by featuring overhangs and
rocky surfaces along the way
for fish food to grow on.
JEFF CORDELL: Look at
the brown scum here.
We love to see that,
because that's where
the little crustaceans
grow that the juvenile
salmon feed on.
You can't count out brown scum.
KEN CHRISTENSEN: Most seawalls
are still get built like
Seattle's was back in the 1930s.
And construction is
expected to increase.
JEFF CORDELL: There's going to
be much more need for coastal
infrastructure and a lot
more thinking about how we can
best create habitat for the
organisms that we're removing
it from.
KEN CHRISTENSEN: Once
the seawall is complete,
Cordell plans to begin
a decade-long monitoring
project to figure out if it
does what it's supposed to.
JEFF CORDELL: Even that
brown stuff needs a good
amount of sunlight to grow.
KEN CHRISTENSEN: If the
experiment succeeds,
the Seattle waterfront's
biggest change could
be the change it inspires in
seawalls around the world.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Ken Christensen in
Seattle, Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very cool.
And that is the
"NewsHour" tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Thank you, and we
will see you soon.